Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel, Chris Philp,
entrepreneur turned politician,
elected as an MP in 2015 and now the
eluted as an MP in 2015 and now the
justice
elected as an MP in 2015 and now the
Justice Minister, the Mayor of
Greater Manchester and former Labour
Greater Manchester and former labour
Health
Greater Manchester and former Labour
Health Secretary Andy Bermingham,
who joins us from Manchester, Helle
Thorning—Schmidt, former Prime
Thorning-Schmidt, former Prime
Minister
Thorning—Schmidt, former Prime
Minister of Denmark and leader of
the social democrats there. She is
currently on the oversight board of
Facebook. Associate editor of the
Daily Telegraph, specialising in
Daily Telagraph, specialising in
politic
Daily Telegraph, specialising in
politics and the Royals, Camilla
politic and the Royals, Camilla
Tominey, an
politics and the Royals, Camilla
Tominey, an award—winning playwright
Tominey, an award-winning playwright
and
Tominey, an award—winning playwright
and screenwriter, James Graham. Good
and screenwriter, james Graham. Good
evening and
and screenwriter, James Graham. Good
evening and welcome to my guests
here in the studio and to Andy down
the line. Tonight, we will have a
mixture of live and pre—recorded
mixture of live and pre-recorded
questions,
mixture of live and pre—recorded
questions, this time from our
contributors in London. I would also
bring in comments and questions via
social media, and you can
social media, and you canjoin in
social media, and you ranjoin in
the
social media, and you canjoin in
the conversation is always on social
media. Our
media. Ourfirst question is
the conversation is always on social
media. Our first question is from
Clare Cooper.
Even if some children do get
back to school before
the end of the summer term,
their experience is more likely
to be about hygiene and social
distancing rather than anything
of educational value.
What can the panel suggest for
a whole generation of schoolchildren
who have now missed nearly half
an academic year and face months
of distrust about every social
contact and the constant threat
of closure again?
Andy, let’s start with you for top
obviously some schools are going to
go back on the 1st of
go back on the 1st ofJune and some
go back on the 1st of june and some
are not.
go back on the 1st ofJune and some
are not. What’s happening where you
are not. what’s happening where you
are? It’s a
are not. What’s happening where you
are? It’s a mixed picture, Fiona.
Some are going back and some have
said therd
said they’d rather take their time
said therd rather take their time
to get the
said they’d rather take their time
to get the right arrangements in
place, but
place, butl
to get the right arrangements in
place, but I agree we want to get
the kids back in school if we can,
the kids back in school if we ran,
as quickly as
the kids back in school if we can,
as quickly as possible, but it has
to be done as safely as possible,
and the key thing is that schools
haven’t closed. It’s as if they
haven’t dosed. It’s as if they
haven’t
haven’t closed. It’s as if they
haven’t been doing anything, but
they have been looking after
children of key workers. I think
teachers are feeling a bit stressed
from the teacher bashing they have
seen this week, so
seen this week, sol
from the teacher bashing they have
seen this week, so I think we need
to de—escalate this row of it. The
to tie-escalate this row of it. The
problem is the
to de—escalate this row of it. The
problem is the government dropped a
date on people of the 1st of
date on people of the 1st ofJune
date on peopla of the 1st of june
about any
date on people of the 1st ofJune
about any real consultation, and I
think the way to resolve this is to
55V
say to head teachers,
think the way to resolve this is to
say to headteachers, in
consultation with councils, try and
get back by the 1st of
get back by the 1st ofJune but as
get back by the 1st of june but as
soon as you
get back by the 1st ofJune but as
soon as you feel is safe, and that
feels to me to be the right
resolution and where we are today.
I’ve got three school—age children,
I’ve got three school-age children,
a year six child,
I’ve got three school—age children,
a year six child, a year to mark her
child and a year five child, so one
of them can
of them ran go
child and a year five child, so one
of them can go back, the one in year
of them ran go back, the one in year
six, and I’ve
of them can go back, the one in year
six, and I’ve been asked by her
school if I want her to go back and
I said yes, so we have half term and
then I will have one of my three
children back and the other two at
children hack and the other two at
home, which
children back and the other two at
home, which consequently means one
of us needs to be at home with the
children, so work can’t go back to
normal if I had been asked if all of
the children should go back, I’d
have said yes. You don’t have the
safety fears we heard from some
teachers and some unions? Not really
because I’ve been impressed so far
with what schools have come up with
in terms of how they are going to
socially distance children and
measures they are going to take. We
had a massive dossier talking about
washing hands and temperature checks
at the door and how they are going
to be separated in class, but
equally, and I know there is a lack
of consensus over the evidence that
we have so far as to how infectious
children are, it’s plausible that
they are not as infectious as
adults, but perhaps not proven, but
there have been a number of studies,
studies in Australia, in Finland,
studies of a child who interacted
after coming back from the French
Alps and having coronavirus with
hundreds of other children and
didn’t pass it on. The chief
scientists of the WHO have said
schools should go back. We have seen
schools go back in parts of Europe I
did a story with the BMA this week
which cited the spike in northern
France, but actually the Foreign
Minister there pointed out that 1.4
million children had come back,
there had been 70 cases but most had
been contracted outside school.
Initially the BMA were supporting
unions in saying that schools should
not ever the Telegraph ran a piece
with them yesterday where they
somewhat softened their stance and
said that schools should go back on
june the 1st if
June the 1st if it is safe to do so
june the 1st if it is safe to do so
so, from
June the 1st if it is safe to do so
so, from some of the evidence I have
seen, I
seen, Ifeel happy
so, from some of the evidence I have
seen, I feel happy with my eldest go
back and, if the other two were
invited to go back, I’d say yes. I
have sympathy with teachers but we
have to consider that the infection
rate before lockdown came in would
rate before lockdown fame in would
have
rate before lockdown came in would
have been higher than it was now,
and arguably teachers could be more
at risk going to the supermarket and
into classrooms. I think measures
should be taken, but I am satisfied
we have got to the point, and I
believe that Sage, which informed
government it was the right time to
55V
say a phased return to school from
june the 1st, I
June the 1st, I understand they will
june the 1st, I understand they will
release
June the lst, I understand they will
release more of their
June the ist, I understand they will
release more of their evidence
tomorrow first up we need to see
that evidence. So far it’s not been
transparent enough, which has led to
transparent enough, which has lad to
confusion.
transparent enough, which has led to
confusion. Lets talk about the
Denmark experience, because Denmark
was the first country in Europe to
reopen its schools. Why was the
reopen its schools. why was the
decision
reopen its schools. Why was the
decision taken, and how has it
worked? I think it’s hard to compare
the UK with Denmark. Denmark is a
much smaller country and we have a
different political system, which I
hope I ran
hope I can talk a bit more about
hope I ran talk a bit more about
based on
hope I can talk a bit more about
based on much more compromise,
consultation, and we could never
send children back to school without
deep consultation with unions and
head teachers
headteachers and
deep consultation with unions and
head teachers and also parents, of
course.
headteachers and also parents, of
course. But they succeeded in
sending children back, and one thing
I was really impressed with, and as
Prime Minister I had my fair share
of debates with the teaching unions,
but one thing I was really impressed
by was how innovative they suddenly
became. They invented new ways of
going to school. They had outdoor
school, Copenhagen teamed up with
cultural facilities all over town
suddenly you saw kids having
education in our national stadium,
they start singing the national
anthem and after that they had their
class in the VIP lounge, you saw
five-year-old
five—year—old kids having their
five-year-old kids having their
education,
five—year—old kids having their
education, having their classroom in
the museum, the national museum of
art. Kane so you think we could do
that sort of thing here is to mock
why not? We have empty theatres,
museums and sports facilities so why
not use them to give a different
kind of education? What I’m singing
kind of education? what I’m singing
Danish
kind of education? What I’m singing
Danish schools, yesterday I saw a
report about children getting
sailing education in the sea. 50
sailing education in the sea. So why
not actually use this time to think
differently about education and team
up, but it ran
up, but it can only be done by local
authorities. It can’t be dictated
that the and that’s another reason
why I think the government needs to
have much more consultation with the
four nations of this country, with
[oral
local authorities, with cities, to
[oral authorities, with cities, to
make
local authorities, with cities, to
make sure this can happen in a
make sure this ran happen in a
smooth way,
make sure this can happen in a
smooth way, and I would really
smooth way, and Iwould really
advise
smooth way, and I would really
advise to take the heat out of this,
because nothing good comes from this
row which we have seen in the last
week. james,
week. James, your mother works in a
week. james, your mother works in a
school. She
week. James, your mother works in a
school. She has an office manager in
a primary school in Nottinghamshire,
doing a lot of the things we are
talking about, making these
preparations. They are nervous but
they are trying to adapt and be
inventive. She has been ordering
pedal bins for tissues for when kids
sneeze. They have been measuring out
how the desks might work in
classrooms, but it’s important to
55V
say that every local authority is
say that every [oral authority is
totally
say that every local authority is
totally different and every school
is totally different. There are big
and small classes, there are areas
of great resource and great
deprivation, and I think it’s
incumbent on our politicians to
empower headmasters and teachers,
because they know what is best for
the children in their schools and I
don’t necessarily see the need for
uniform a standardised, nationwide
roll-out. I
roll—out. I think the dates and
roll-out. I think the dates and
times
roll—out. I think the dates and
times and methods need to be decided
by the teachers. But I love what you
said about using cultural
institutions to contribute to the
positive learning of children stop I
think it was mentioned in the
question, we have a whole generation
who are set at home with these
incredibly eager minds and the
desire to be learning, and I think
that is
that is one thing that the theatre
industry in its lockdown has been
reasonably good at, and education
departments have been continuing to
function and to work with teachers
to get actor sat at home to
musicians at to inspire kids in that
way. Unfortunately, we will not be
able to open any time soon, and I
think it’s incumbent on us to try
and find as inventive and exciting
“Y
way to keep kids stimulated as
possible. The 1st of
possible. The 1st ofJune
possible. The 1st of June
announcement
possible. The 1st ofJune
announcement has turned into a bit
of a mess, hasn’t it? You heard Andy
saying there was no consultation,
and we were talking about trying to
take the heat out of it. Now we have
a situation where the 1st of
a situation where the 1st ofJune,
a situation where the 1st of june,
at the
a situation where the 1st ofJune,
at the moment, there will be up to
2000 schools not opening, so this
roll-out
roll—out the government wanted isn’t
roll-out the government wanted isn’t
going to
roll—out the government wanted isn’t
going to happen. I think there was
plenty of advance notice. The
measure was announced a few weeks
ago in response to scientific
advice. As Camilla said, there is a
load more advice and scientific
evidence to be published tomorrow to
look at. On the point about the
constituent nations of the UK,
Walas,
Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland
Walas, Northern Ireland and Scotland
chart
Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland
chart their own course, but as far
as England is concerned we are
following the advice we have been
given strip it is really important
when safe to get children back into
school for exactly the reason that
was mentioned in the question. I am
worried there are children that are
missing out on education,
particularly children from
disadvantaged backgrounds who are at
risk of falling behind in their
studies, so as soon as we safely can
studies, so as soon as we safely ran
I think it’s
studies, so as soon as we safely can
I think it’s important to get
children back into the classroom. Of
course, at no point are we going to
take any risk with anyone’s health,
children,
children, teachers, parents or
anyone. The advice will get
published tomorrow and they will be
further confirmation, I think,
further confirmation, Ithink, next
week. If it is safe to go back on
june the 1st, as
June the 1st, as we currently
june the 1st, as we currently
believe
June the 1st, as we currently
believe it is, might encourage
June the lst, as we currently
believe it is, might encourage all
schools to do that in a safe way to
make sure children don’t fall
behind. We don’t want any child to
get left behind, especially those
from disadvantaged backgrounds. Do
you think it would be more likely to
be successful if head teachers had
known about the 1st of
known about the 1st ofJune before
known about the 1st of june before
it was
known about the 1st ofJune before
it was announced to the nation at
large? The union of head teachers
said the first they knew about it
was on the television. There are
thousands of head teachers and tens
of hundreds of teachers, so it’s
difficult to selectively announce it
to that number of people. Hang on,
to that number of peopla. Hang on,
that’s the
to that number of people. Hang on,
that’s the Department for Education,
that it’s only what they can do! Are
that it’s only what they ran do! Are
you saying the
that it’s only what they can do! Are
you saying the only way to tell
schools or through a press
conference? If you make an
announcement to 10,000 teachers, you
are effectively announcing publicly,
and teaching unions have been
closely consulted about the science,
they have been on cells where the
they have been on falls where the
government’s
they have been on cells where the
government’s scientific advisers
have briefed them on that, and I
would urge teaching unions their
members to positively and
constructively engage with schools
to find safe ways of going back. As
james said,
James said, that will be different
james said, that will be different
for
James said, that will be different
for different schools, because of
their geography and classroom
layouts being different, but the
important thing is we make sure no
child gets left behind, and I’d like
to add to what
to add to whatJames said that the
to add to whatjames said that the
idea of seeing
to add to whatJames said that the
idea of seeing if we can use empty
idea of seeing if we ran use empty
cultural
idea of seeing if we can use empty
cultural institutions is really
interesting and that is worth
exploring because, sadly, many of
our great institutions like theatres
and museums are not being used and,
if we ran
if we can find a way of safely
if we ran find a way of safely
getting
if we can find a way of safely
getting children into them, it would
be a great and enriching experience
for them. I want what parents are
supposed to make of this. A number
of schools are embracing, happy or
not, it’s difficult to say, but are
planning to go ahead with the ist of
planning to go ahead with the 1st of
june opening,
June opening, and lots of schools
june opening, and lots of schools
that are
June opening, and lots of schools
that are not. What are parents
that are not. what are parents
supposed to
that are not. What are parents
supposed to make of it? Is it that
some schools are less risk averse
some schools are lass risk averse
than
some schools are less risk averse
than others, or some are better
prepared? How can parents make any
prepared? How ran parents make any
decent
prepared? How can parents make any
decent assessment? I think they are
probably a bit bemused, to be
honest, because it’s a row that’s
been going on for the last few days
and I’m not sure that helps parents.
I would agree with Helle
I would agree with Helle, but head
teachers in the driving seat and let
them make the judgment about when
it’s safe to open the school,
because parents will probably look
most to the head
most to the headteacher
because parents will probably look
most to the head teacher for advice
about the safety of their kids. I
think it should also be done in
consultation with local councillors,
because the fact is that
circumstances will differ from one
place to another in terms of the
teaching staff, some of them might
be self—isolating them there might
be self-isolating them there might
be
be self—isolating them there might
beissues
be issues they have to deal with.
There will be physical circumstances
different in every school, but don’t
forget that the R rate, the
reproduction number varies from one
region to another. In the north, we
have seen a higher R number ten in
the south so you can’t blame any
council for taking a cautious
approach. That is what I say to the
government that work in partnership
with local councils and absolutely
55V
say to them, get schools open on the
1st of june if we
1st ofJune if we can, but we
1st ofjune if we ran, but we
respect the
1st ofJune if we can, but we
respect the fact that, if you think
a bit longer as needed to get
arrangements in place, so be it, and
we will work in partnership on that.
Lets get away from teacher bashing.
We have seen too much of that in the
last few weeks. They have been
working really hard through this
period, often teaching kids at home,
being innovative in all of the ways
you would want them to be, and I
think we need to de—escalate this
think we need to de-esralate this
row and
think we need to de—escalate this
row and focus on practical steps to
get kids back in school when it’s
safe. Some comments on social media,
Lawrence
lawrence says, if
safe. Some comments on social media,
Lawrence says, if it’s safer
children to go back to school, why
isn’t it safe for the House of
Commons? We had a vote in Parliament
Commons? We had a vote in Partiament
yesterday and,
Commons? We had a vote in Parliament
yesterday and, from June the 2nd
yesterday and, from june the 2nd
onwards,
yesterday and, from June the 2nd
onwards, these arrangements to vote
remotely are being ended and we will
be going back in, because it is
important that our national
Parliament does its
Parliament does itsjob,
Parliament does its job,
scrutinising what the government is
scmtinising what the government is
doing,
scrutinising what the government is
doing, properly asking questions
doing, property asking questions
things like
doing, properly asking questions
things like bill committees and
delegated Legislation committees
have not been sitting, so let’s get
Parliament working, showing
leadership and doing what we are
asking everybody else to do, go to
work if you safely can. And D. I
work if you safely ran. And D. I
think it
work if you safely can. And D. I
think it was a really poor decision
taken by MPs this week. We are not
asking schools to come fully back.
We are asking them to come back on
an interim basis. For Parliament to
an interim basis. For Partiament to
vote to
an interim basis. For Parliament to
vote to come back completely, I
think, sets a really poor example to
the country, and let’s remember
Westminster was a hotbed for the
spread of the virus just a few weeks
ago. Sometimes in Parliament, it’s a
ago. Sometimes in Partiament, it’s a
use of do
ago. Sometimes in Parliament, it’s a
case of do as we say, not as we do,
rase of do as we say, not as we do,
and I don’t
case of do as we say, not as we do,
and I don’t think it’s acceptable.
and I don’t think it’s acceptabla.
It
and I don’t think it’s acceptable.
It doesn’t suggest to me that the
premier workplace in the country are
taking a safety first approach. Just
taking a safety first approach. just
to
taking a safety first approach. Just
to correct that, we will not be
functioning as normal, there will be
different arrangements for things
like voting, so it will not be
business as usual but MPs will be
doing their
doing theirjob. In the question, I
think Claire Cooper. About the
wellbeing of children and the sense
that it will be different when they
go back, they will be social
distancing, and I don’t quite know
how the curriculum might match up to
what it might have been if we were
not in this situation, but the
bottom line is that children miss
their friends and that social
interaction and, for children that
have been all right at home and are
in safe and loving homes, they have
been 0K and maybe they can last
been 0K and maybe they ran last
until
been 0K and maybe they can last
until September without much damage.
It has happened here is that the
government expected 20% attendance
government expected 2096 attendance
levels
government expected 20% attendance
levels at schools throughout
knock—down they hoped that all
vulnerable children and a lot of
children of key workers were
detained, and what happened was less
than 296
than 2% of children attended, and
than 296 of children attended, and
I’m quite
than 2% of children attended, and
I’m quite involved with a charity
rallad
called the national association for
rallad the national association for
the
called the national association for
the children of alcoholics, and
the children of alcoholic, and
their
the children of alcoholics, and
their calls are going through the
roof. I did a show with Esther
roof. I did a show with Fsther
Rantzen
roof. I did a show with Esther
Rantzen the other day and she was
saying Childline had been inundated.
We have to weigh up the risks. Yes,
there is a risk to children perhaps
of contracting Covid—19 and
of contracting Covid-19 and
spreading
of contracting Covid—19 and
spreading it to vulnerable adults,
and that’s not something we want,
but what is the risk to vulnerable
children from moaning in homes where
they may be facing abuse or other
problems which greatly affect their
problams which greatly affect their
wellbeing
problems which greatly affect their
wellbeing much more than being
socially distancing a classroom for
from remaining in homes. That’s an
important point that what is the
consequence for children who can’t
go to school? I knew that very well
when I was CEO of Save the Children.
If children don’t go to school, they
forget everything they learned, the
full year, so we will have children
who practically lives a whole year
who practically lives a whola year
of
who practically lives a whole year
of education because they simply
can’t remember what they learnt six
months ago. So I am a bit worried
that it will last too long and we
will be handing, taking a bit of the
children’s future twice. First, we
take almost a year of their
education and then we are also
handing them a very large bill for a
lockdown which has become very
expensive, so these balances, but I
would again say find a good balance
with also the teachers and take the
heat out of it. The only way this
ran be
can be solved is by being pragmatic.
Clare, what is your view? I quite
like the idea that Helle had about
using the news creatively, the value
of education will have been taken
away from children and I think this
is every child, it is children from
reception right up to the sixth
formers who are losing out on their
A-levels. I
A—levels. I am grieving because of
A-levels. I am grieving because of
that, actually,
A—levels. I am grieving because of
that, actually, but also I think
what I fear is that children, there
will be a distrust about social
contact. At this term maybe but
going into the next academic year
and I think the value and the trust,
the way that schools where before
they broke up in the middle of
March, has disappeared and I feel
March, has disappeared and Ifeel
profoundly
March, has disappeared and I feel
profoundly sad and worried for the
children. I am a psychologist,
children. lam a psychologist, I
don’t work in education, but I can
don’t work in education, but I ran
see the
don’t work in education, but I can
see the psychological damage that
potentially is happening to a whole
generation of children. Clare, thank
you very much for your question and
thank you for
thank you forjoining us live. Let
thank you for joining us live. Let
us go to Alfie
thank you forjoining us live. Let
us go to Alfie now. He has another
question. Yes.
Test, track and trace sounds really,
really important, but what will be
in place on the ist ofJune will be
missing many components including
the contact tracing app.
When are we likely to see the test,
track and trace fully implemented?
Of course it is full implementation,
Of course it is full implamentation,
according to
Of course it is full implementation,
according to the government anyway,
that is critical in terms of easing
the lockdown and getting children
back to school. When are we going to
back to school. when are we going to
see test
back to school. When are we going to
see test track and trace fully
implement it, not
implement it, notjust the
beginnings of it, but fully
implemented? We have seen the new
aPP
app being tested on the Isle of
Wight
Night and
app being tested on the Isle of
Wight and we have learned from that
Night and we have learned from that
experience
Wight and we have learned from that
experience and one of the things we
have learned is that we can
effectively deploy test track and
trace with the manual tracers. We
have recruited 2A,000 of those
have recruited 24,000 of those
already and
have recruited 2A,000 of those
already and we will be up to the
full complement of 25,000 by the lst
full complement of 25,000 by the 1st
of june and the
ofJune and the service
full complement of 25,000 by the lst
ofJune and the service will be
of june and the service will be
fully
ofJune and the service will be
fully operational on the lst of
fully operational on the lst ofJune
fully operational on the 1st of june
and able
fully operational on the 1st ofJune
and able to track and trace 10,000
peopla a day,
people a day, that is four times
peopla a day, that is four times
more roughly
people a day, that is four times
more roughly than the number of
rases we
cases we are finding each day from
the 1st of june
the 1st ofJune onwards. We
cases we are finding each day from
the ist ofJune onwards. We think
the 1st of june onwards. We think
the app will
the 1st ofJune onwards. We think
the app will be ready to deploy a
few weeks after that but they are
complimentary and the system will
work comprehensively from the 1st of
june which is
June which is one of the government
june which is one of the government
because my
June which is one of the government
because my critical test and it will
help us learn more about the way the
disease spreads, it will help its
stop spreading any further and it is
an important step forward in the way
we are dealing with this disease. It
is good news. There have been a
number of deadlines that have
sUpped
slipped but you sound very confident
and possibly rightly so. Very
confident that on the 1st of
confident that on the 1st ofJune it
confident that on the 1st of june it
is going to hit
confident that on the ist ofJune it
is going to hit the ground running.
is going to hit the ground mnning.
South
is going to hit the ground running.
South Korea is cited as a great
example of contact tracing and they
had a ﬂare-up
had a flare—up in a nightclub at the
had a ﬂare-up in a nightclub at the
beginning of
had a flare—up in a nightclub at the
beginning of the month and they
traced 65,000 people defied 170 new
infections and each one was
quarantined. Is that the kind of
level of contact tracing the
government will be able to do from
the 1st of
the lst ofJune? The capacity will
the 1st of june? The capacity will
be 10,000
the 1st ofJune? The capacity will
be 10,000 traces every day and the
Prime Minister in the House of
Commons on Wednesday was absolutely
rategoric that
categoric that we are ready to go on
rategoric that we are ready to go on
the 1st of june
categoric that we are ready to go on
the 1st ofJune and we need 25,000
the 1st of june and we need 25,000
people to do it,
the 1st ofJune and we need 25,000
people to do it, 2A,000 of those
peopla to do it, 24,000 of those
have
people to do it, 2A,000 of those
have been recruited already and we
will get to 25,000 by the lst of
will get to 25,000 by the 1st of
june and we
will get to 25,000 by the lst of
June and we will get there. Even if
june and we will get there. Even if
we do not
June and we will get there. Even if
we do not have the app? It seems to
be having a teething problems. It
be having a teething problams. It
has
be having a teething problems. It
has been tested in the Isle of
Wight. Having the app is not
critical for this?
criticalforthis? It
Wight. Having the app is not
critical for this? It sounded
criticalfor this? It sounded like
critical for this? It sounded like
it was
criticalfor this? It sounded like
it was the next big thing. The
experience in the Isle of Wight
shows you can do effective contact
tracing without it but it is
obviously helpful and adds to it and
we will get it in a few weeks. At
the same time there are other
innovations happening, Matt Hancock
this afternoon talked about a new
test been deployed today which gives
you a result within 20 minutes and
we have heard about advances with
antibody testing as well and the
science is really beginning to catch
“P
up with this disease and for me, the
science is what really gives me hope
for the future. Hope that we can
for the future. Hope that we ran
move beyond
for the future. Hope that we can
move beyond the strange
circumstances of the last few weeks
and return to something of a normal
life as the months go by. Helle, we
life as the months go by. Hello, we
look at
life as the months go by. Helle, we
look at the example of Denmark which
has blazed a trail in return to
normality, either you had no doubts
at that point, possibly one, where
is the UK started after 350 deaths.
Your lockdown only lasted one month
and you have now eased it. In terms
of test, track and trace, how
important was that in terms of
Denmark been able to cope? It is
very hard and it would be difficult
to find someone who thought it was a
good idea to wait a good week in the
UK to lock down. The lockdown Sibley
fame
came too light in this country and I
think it caused a lot of damage. It
was 335 days in the UK or was it
zero or one day? They realised it
was a big deal and they locked down
and they did that a good week before
the UK and there is no doubt the UK
should have done the same. The other
thing and looking at Germany which
has a stellar example, they started
their testing in their tracing and
their quarantine much earlier and
their quarantine much eartier and
that
their quarantine much earlier and
that means that even though they
locked down at more or less the same
locked down at more or lass the same
time as
locked down at more or less the same
time as the UK, they were at a
different place in their curve and
that basically meant that they have
come out of this much better than
the UK and I am not sitting here
criticising the government, that is
not why I am here but I think we
have to learn from these things and
be completely honest but of course
the UK lockdown came too late and if
the tracing had been up and running
the tracing had been up and mnning
much before,
the tracing had been up and running
much before, I think the country
could have opened much before. Also
in Denmark we had a much softer
lockdown, and now we are starting
the tracking and tracing and
quarantining as well and the next
question we have to find out is how
we are going to quarantine these
people. How this is actually going
peopla. How this is actually going
to happen, a
people. How this is actually going
to happen, a little idea from our
own country, they are offering to
use some of the hotels that have no
guests to help people isolate. At
guests to help peopla isolate. At
the
guests to help people isolate. At
the cost of the government. They
could be isolated in hotels. There
have to be
have to he plans, pragmatic plans
that ran
that can be rolled out and it has to
that ran be rolled out and it has to
be ramped up
that can be rolled out and it has to
be ramped up pretty fast and I have
no doubt, if it was ramped up
eartier, the
earlier, the UK would have been
eartier, the UK would have been
safe. Do you
earlier, the UK would have been
safe. Do you agree with any of that?
Lockdown too late? Testing should
have been started earlier? It is
have been started eartier? It is
very hard to
have been started earlier? It is
very hard to compare countries
because demographics are different,
Denmark is a relatively small
country, we have the biggest city in
Europe, London. The UK still has the
highest number of excess deaths at
its peak of any country in Europe,
according to a study from Oxford
University. By any margin, we are
the worst or second or third worst,
there probably are not many
countries looking at the UK saying
that is the way to do it, I would
tentatively suggest. It is difficult
to make those comparisons when you
have to account for demographics,
have to account for demographic,
age of the
have to account for demographics,
age of the population, pre—existing
age of the population, pre-existing
health
age of the population, pre—existing
health conditions, a city like
London, all of those things are
different in different countries,
London is unique within Europe and
Manchester as well. Helle said the
lockdown was too late, do you accept
that? The government advisor, Sage
gave dear
gave clear legal, health and
scientific advice and the government
followed that advice. That was the
right thing to do. James. Of course
right thing to do. james. Of course
I agree it is vital
right thing to do. James. Of course
I agree it is vital that it rolls
out as soon as possible, not
out as soon as possible, notjust
out as soon as possible, not just
because
out as soon as possible, notjust
because of our safety but also
because people need that sense of
confidence so that they can begin
confidence so that they ran begin
opening up
confidence so that they can begin
opening up the economy, the most
vulnerable sectors of the economy
require people to be physically
require peopla to be physically
dose
require people to be physically
close to one another, whether that
dose to one another, whether that
is
close to one another, whether that
is restaurants, bars, arts and
entertainment, there will be a huge
benefit to a test that can give an
benefit to a test that ran give an
answer in
benefit to a test that can give an
answer in 20 minutes for the likes
of film and television production,
of film and telavision production,
it is not
of film and television production,
it is not the most important thing
in the world, but it is a vital
sector and it has got lots of people
sector and it has got lots of peopla
through the
sector and it has got lots of people
through the lockdown and people are
through the lockdown and peopla are
going to start
through the lockdown and people are
going to start to see the autumn
schedules clearing themselves of
British dramas. That would be
incredible to have confidence that
you could get actors and crew on a
set, actors need to kiss, hug,
fight, unless you want terrible
dramas, so this stuff doesn’t
matter, it is not the priority, but
I think confidence that people can
I think confidence that peopla ran
work
I think confidence that people ran
work safely
I think confidence that people can
work safely and that tourists and
peopla are
people are returning to city and
peopla are returning to city and
town
people are returning to city and
town centres can eat and drink and
town centres ran eat and drink and
reinvest in
town centres can eat and drink and
reinvest in the economy and that is
vital. It should be pointed out that
the lockdown did come in time for
the peak. So,
the peak. 50, there is an argument
the peak. So, there is an argument
to say that if we
the peak. 50, there is an argument
to say that if we had locked down
eartier
earlier whether people would have
eartier whether peopla would have
been
earlier whether people would have
been psychologically ready and
obeyed it and if you see the
lockdown coming in on March the
23rd, it was about ten days later
that you see that spike. The peak
follows the lockdown. Of course it
does. The peak does follow the
lockdown but there was an argument
at the time that it was only the
week before and rightly or wrongly,
and decisions will now be made about
future events, but only the week
before there were thousands at
Cheltenham. Every step of the way
the government has had to look at
the psychology of the public on it
and I spoke to a Tory MP this week
who likened the confusion over
timing and everything seeming back
to front two that Morecambe and
to front two that Morerambe and
white
to front two that Morecambe and
white sketch with Andre Previn where
he says, you’re not playing all of
the right notes and Eric Morecambe
the right notes and Eric Morerambe
says I am, but
the right notes and Eric Morecambe
says I am, butjust not necessarily
says I am, but just not necessarily
in the right
says I am, butjust not necessarily
in the right order and I think from
the public perspective is they have
asked themselves why are you doing
this now, the quarantine thing, lots
of peopla are
of people are saying, you are
quarantining flights now... Not yet
quarantining ﬂights now... Not yet
but they are
quarantining flights now... Not yet
but they are talking about it. Why
but they are talking about it. why
didn’t you do
but they are talking about it. Why
didn’t you do them at the beginning
of the crisis? The messaging around
the Prime Minister addressing the
pub“:
public about the loosening of the
restrictions before actually
releasing the paperwork describing
how people should go back to work it
seemed to be the wrong way around.
The test, track and trace, it is
great that we have this technology
but that did add that defy three
years ago the problems that would be
faced by this country in the event
of a global pandemic and people are
of a global pandemic and peopla are
asking
of a global pandemic and people are
asking themselves why has the timing
come so late? Why is it that
countries like South Korea were on
top of this at the beginning of the
pandemic hitting their nation,
whereas we only seem to be getting
to grips with some of that
technological response at the end of
it? One of the reasons why
quarantine will come in at the end
of the pandemic rather than the
middle is because when the number of
rases in
cases in circulation in the
population are so much larger than
those being brought in by air
passengers, there is no point in
having a quarantine, they
represented less than 0.5% of the
caseload. Now that the caseload is
going down domestically and there is
prospect that air travel will go up,
it becomes relatively more important
and it measures like quarantine
become significant. There were so
many things that people said would
many things that peopla said would
go wrong
many things that people said would
go wrong that have been handled very
well. About eight weeks ago, people
said we would run out of ventilators
said we would mn out of ventilators
and now
said we would run out of ventilators
and now we have 13000 and never more
than half of them have been in use.
People said we might run out of
intensive care beds, we have nearly
intensive rare beds, we have nearty
doubled
intensive care beds, we have nearly
doubled the number of beds at no
more than half of those have ever
been in use by coronavirus patients.
All of those aspects of the
response, which include the
relationship to the timing, have
worked in this country very well and
I think we can all collectively take
I think we ran all collactively take
some pride in
I think we can all collectively take
some pride in the way that as a
nation we have come together, we
have worked together on the
lockdown, it has been difficult,
difficult for families,
difficult forfamilies, children,
difficult for families, children,
peopla at
difficult forfamilies, children,
people at work, the art sector,
peopla at work, the art sector,
older peopla,
people at work, the art sector,
older people, tough for all of us
older peopla, tough for all of us
but we
older people, tough for all of us
but we have worked together, we have
been disciplined and thankfully now
been disciplined and thankfuuy now
we are
been disciplined and thankfully now
we are moving into a slightly
happier days ahead and I think we
ran take
can take collective national pride
ran take collactive national pride
in the way
can take collective national pride
in the way we have worked together
on that.
I’v
e
I’ve tried to give the government
the benefit of the doubt and I
understand how difficult the
challenge is that they are dealing
with, and I have a lot of sympathy
with that, but they seem to me to be
repeating the same mistakes
throughout this. Is that sometimes
the rhetoric is running ahead of the
the rhetoric is mnning ahead of the
reality. We saw
the rhetoric is running ahead of the
reality. We saw that on testing, we
saw it on PPE and I think we are now
seeing it again with this. From what
I know in Greater Manchester, there
will not be a world beating
will not be a world heating system
in place by the lst of
in place by the lst ofJune,
will not be a world heating system
in place by the 1st ofJune, as the
in place by the 1st of june, as the
Prime
in place by the 1st ofJune, as the
Prime Minister seems to suggest
yesterday. Chris is saying it will
be, so what makes you say that? They
just appointed the chief executive
of Leeds about two weeks ago to try
and integrate the local system with
and integrate the [oral system with
the
and integrate the local system with
the national system, and he is
working through that at the moment
and it’s complicated. For what I
know, it will be beginning by then
but it will nowhere near be in
place, and I
place, and Ifeel that that 1st
but it will nowhere near be in
place, and I feel that that 1st of
june date is
June date is going back to that
conversation we were saying about
schools, and really schools should
only be opening when this is
properly
property in
only be opening when this is
properly in place. The second
mistake touches on this as well.
There is a lot of local expertise on
There is a lot of [oral expertise on
these issues,
There is a lot of local expertise on
these issues, but throughout this
the government has almost
disregarded that and kind of rushed
disregarded that and kind of mshed
to stand
disregarded that and kind of rushed
to stand on its own national systems
and sign contracts with private
entities and trying to build
something from scratch, and I think
we’ve seen that here and we have
some doubts about the quality of the
training provided. They really
should have used the local expertise
should have used the [oral expertise
first and
should have used the local expertise
first and build from there, and I
just feel that the government is
making problems for itself by not
making problams for itself by not
learning
making problems for itself by not
learning from some of those earlier
learning from some of those eartier
mistakes,
learning from some of those earlier
mistakes, and going on a different
path. I
path. Ithink
mistakes, and going on a different
path. I think we are getting there,
that’s how I would describe it, but
I think the government should be
honest with people. It will be mid
honest with peopla. It will be mid
or late june
honest with people. It will be mid
or late June before
or lateJune before the system is up
or late june before the system is up
and mnning.
or lateJune before the system is up
and running. Alfie, are you
confident that test, track and trace
will be fully embedded by the 1st of
june? what
June? What prompted your question?
june? what prompted your question?
I’m a computer
June? What prompted your question?
I’m a computer science student and
my experience of software
engineering is that things do go
wrong, they often go wrong, and we
are mnning out
are running out of time. If you want
are mnning out of time. If you want
to launch an app
are running out of time. If you want
to launch an app on the same day
that schools open, you are asking
for the worst. It sounds like we are
probably not going to get the app on
the 1st of june
the 1st ofJune I am wondering if
the 1st of june I am wondering if
it’s a question
the 1st ofJune I am wondering if
it’s a question of interpretation,
because you have got Alfie saying,
when will test, track and trace be
fully embedded, and you say
absolutely on June the
absolutely onJune the 1st, and Andy
absolutely on june the 1st, and Andy
saying it will be
absolutely onJune the lst, and Andy
saying it will be getting go but
fully embedded, up and running, all
bells and whistles, no. Which is it,
bells and whisﬂas, no. which is it,
in your view?
bells and whistles, no. Which is it,
in your view? The 25,000 people
needed to operate the system and
deliver 10,000 track and traces per
day will be in place by the lst of
day will be in place by the 1st of
june. 24,000
day will be in place by the lst of
June. 2A,000 of them have been
june. 24,000 of them have been
recruited
June. 2A,000 of them have been
recruited already and are in
advanced stages of training, so it
will be ready to deploy on the 1st
of june. The
will be ready to deploy on the lst
ofJune. The app will be a few weeks
of june. The app will be a few weeks
after that,
ofJune. The app will be a few weeks
after that, which will further
augment the system and we will learn
a lot more about coronavirus by
using it, but we will be ready to go
on the 1st of
on the 1st ofJune, and it
using it, but we will be ready to go
on the lst ofJune, and it will
on the 1st of june, and it will
really
on the lst of june, and it will
really help
on the lst ofJune, and it will
really help us understand how the
disease spreads it will help us
control it, identify people in
control it, identify peopla in
danger of
control it, identify people in
danger of catching it, get them
quarantined and tested really
quickly. Is it brings us back to the
first question with schools, because
you had a member of Sage, the body
that advises the government, saying
a well—functioning track and trace
a well-functioning track and trace
system
a well—functioning track and trace
system needs to be embedded and
working well before schools can
working well before schools ran
reopen.
working well before schools can
reopen. Camilla, you are really keen
for your kids to go back to school.
The system will start on
The system will start onJune the
The system will start on june the
1st, track
The system will start onJune the
1st, track and trace. We will see,
and you are confident that it
lst, track and trace. We will see,
and you are confident that it will
be all systems go from the get go.
Do you have any concerns about it?
From the perspective of all of the
evidence pointing to children not
being badly affected if they do
catch it and not seemingly being as
infectious as adults, and
considering all of the measures that
schools have been putting in place
to make sure that children are safe,
and considering the fact that they
are missing out on so much of their
education by being at home, all of
this is about assessing risk and
weighing up the different
probabilities, and I think, on a
probabilities, and Ithink, on a
balance
probabilities, and I think, on a
balance of probabilities, overall,
after two months at home with us
trying to home educate them as well
as we ran
as we can while also working, I
as we ran whila also working, I
think that,
as we can while also working, I
think that, on balance, my children
are better off in school, yes. Let’s
take another question, from Gerald
Armin.
Theatres were the first
to close and will probably
be the last to reopen,
which could be many months.
For many small independent theatres
that don’t have deep pockets,
it could be the end.
m
Do you think the government should
hail
bail us out? I think it’s worth
acknowledging upfront that, of
acknowladging upfront that, of
course,
acknowledging upfront that, of
course, against a backdrop of huge
strain on the NHS and the work of
carers and these big questions we
are asking about when kids should go
back to school, they will always
remain the primary focus, and that’s
right, but it’s also right that, as
the country starts to get back on
its feet, certain industries and
companies are going to have them
which can contribute as profitable
which ran contribute as profitable
industries,
which can contribute as profitable
industries, can contribute
substantially to the revitalising
and reopening of Britain, it’s
incumbent on us to have these
difficult conversations with
government whereby we need to tell
them the specific challenges we are
going to have in order to play that
active role in reactivating the
economy of the you have the
government here in the form of
Chris, the one—man government. Do
Chris, the one-man government. Do
you want more
Chris, the one—man government. Do
you want more bailouts? The
government has provided all sorts of
money in terms of coronavirus
money in terms of coronavims
interruption
money in terms of coronavirus
interruption loans for business and
that kind of thing. Is there a
separate bailout you would request
from the government for theatres?
The job
Thejob retention
from the government for theatres?
The job retention scheme was a
life—saver for so many in
life—saverfor so many in my
life-saver for so many in my
industry, the
life—saverfor so many in my
industry, the majority of whom are
freelancers. It wasn’t perfect and
didn’t catch everybody, and I think
we need to look at, but
unfortunately, because joyfully the
next few months, according to your
plan, pubs and restaurants and
manufacturers and retailers start to
manufacturers and retailars start to
be able
manufacturers and retailers start to
be able to slowly reopen, but
unfortunately that will not be the
use
case with theatres and performing
use with theatres and performing
arts
case with theatres and performing
arts venues. We have tried our best
but it’s now apparent there was no
real viable social distancing model
real viabla social distancing model
to get
real viable social distancing model
to get audiences safely. It has to
be safe for them to go back to
theatres to watch plays and
musicals. You’d have to be 20% for
musicals. You’d have to be 2096 for
them and they
musicals. You’d have to be 20% for
them and they need be about 80% full
them and they need be about 8096 full
in order
them and they need be about 80% full
in order to sustain themselves
economically. So that’s just a
problam,
problem, because the culture sectors
are so profitable. It’s not like
this is the 19705 and we are bailing
out industries that are not
profitable. I think the figure is
about, for every £1 you invest in
the arts, you get about £5 back, so
the arts, you get about is back, so
we can’t
the arts, you get about £5 back, so
we can’t wait to be back and doing
that for you, and it’s not the case
that for you, and it’s not the use
that it’s an
that for you, and it’s not the case
that it’s an equivalence whereby
arts funding costs hospital beds. We
ran
ﬂ" pay
arts funding costs hospital beds. We
ran pay for
can pay for more hospital beds in
ran pay for more hospital beds in
our films, TV
can pay for more hospital beds in
ourfilms, TV dramas
our films, TV dramas and theatres,
but it’s likely that that might not
happen submit up to and including a
year, so this time next year might
be the first time would properly get
be the first time would property get
to reopen. I
be the first time would properly get
to reopen. I guess what we need to
possibly, specifically, is more
ﬂexibility,
flexibility, if it’s possible, on
ﬂexibility, if it’s possible, on
the job
flexibility, if it’s possible, on
thejob retention
the job retention scheme for sectors
that will have zero income for many,
many months, and unfortunately we
have to start asking for an
investment package that will allow
us to bridge this gap in the short
term between not being able to open
and being able to open with all guns
blazing, because I think we are a
bit squeezed. Sometimes I think we
are squeamish about the arts
argument because we think it’s an
elitist thing, when in fact actually
won in two people go to see a play
won in two peopla go to see a play
or a
won in two people go to see a play
or a musical every year. Think of
all the success stories when it
comes to British films and TV
dramas. There is such a global
thirst for British content and
British stories, in all their
wonderful modern mix. But it’s all
interconnected so as a final point,
even for people who don’t know to
the theatre, that half of the
country that doesn’t go, and that
was me growing up, and all I think
about every night is how to get that
second half to go to the theatre,
what I think people enjoy and what
what I think peopla enjoy and what
has
what I think people enjoy and what
has been a great benefit in lockdown
are all the TV dramas that have
entertained and provided mental
health and wellbeing to a nation in
lockdown for I was so privileged to
be able to write and show Quiz,
which was a drama about a major
scandal, and I was delighted hear
scandal, and Iwas delighted hear
from
scandal, and I was delighted hear
from families watching it. It’s all
connected. I come from theatre for
the Phoebe Waller—Bridge, who sold
the Phoebe Waller-Bridge, who sold
ﬂea
the Phoebe Waller—Bridge, who sold
flea back to the world, comes from
ﬂea back to the world, comes from
theatre.
flea back to the world, comes from
theatre. You will start to notice a
difference if we can’t be saved, and
the facts are that, without a bit of
help, 7096 of
help, 70% of these theatres will be
help, 7096 of these theatres will be
closed by
help, 70% of these theatres will be
closed by Christmas and they will
not be able to reopen. Plank the
Globe says it will not survive
without emergency funds. Plank south
of theatre management say have gone
into liquidation for the plan,
nothing pit in Southampton. Should
there be a lifeline thrown to the
arts by the government? Definitely.
I think what is needed, really, in
Ithink what is needed, really, in
this
I think what is needed, really, in
this timeline, and it was almost the
fussiest of the announcements that
were made last week in terms of the
softening of restrictions, there was
a lot of stuff on sport events but
not much on cultural, and it was not
very easily specified, and actually
I think,
Ithink, if
very easily specified, and actually
I think, if you want to give theatre
and creative arts industry in
future, you need to put a date on it
so the public and say, brilliant,
from September I can look forward to
from September I ran look forward to
going back to
from September I can look forward to
going back to the theatre. But how
ran you put a
can you put a date on it? You can’t
ran you put a date on it? You can’t
predict how the
can you put a date on it? You can’t
predict how the pandemic will go.
But we heard about things happening
in june and
inJune and we heard that
hairdressers may be going back into
business, thank goodness, from July,
business, thank goodness, from july,
and we
business, thank goodness, from July,
and we didn’t hear anything about
the theatre or other cultural
events, and I think it’s important
you know, gigs and concerts. I
appreciate there at the end of the
stale
scale because they are mass
sale because they are mass
gatherings,
scale because they are mass
gatherings, and that is what is
advised against, but if there were a
window, because I know from my own
and I’m sure the panellists will
agree, I wouldn’t mind booking
agree, Iwouldn’t mind booking
somethings
agree, I wouldn’t mind booking
somethings into look forward to at
Christmas, and that would give
theatre industry a lifeline if they
were able to open bookings from a
certain time I appreciate the
science on it is not
straightforward, but I feel they
have been cast adrift somewhat, and
it’s no wonder that people like
it’s no wonder that peopla like
james and
it’s no wonder that people like
James and his colleagues in that
james and his colleagues in that
industry are
James and his colleagues in that
industry are in complete limbo,
frankly not knowing when they can
frankly not knowing when they ran
get back not
frankly not knowing when they can
get back notjust a normal but even
get back not just a normal but even
the new
get back notjust a normal but even
the new normal everybody is talking
about. james
about. James and Camilla are
about. james and Camilla are
suggesting
about. James and Camilla are
suggesting a bailout. Andy, can the
suggesting a bailout. Andy, ran the
government
suggesting a bailout. Andy, can the
government afford it? Rishi Sunak is
talking about a recession the like
of which we have never known coming
to the track and spending a fortune
on bailing out, supporting companies
and furlough schemes. Can we really
and furlough schemes. (“an we really
afford to
and furlough schemes. Can we really
afford to support theatres as well?
Well, what would we lose? These
organisations are the fabric of our
cities, the life of our society. As
a former Culture Secretary, I want
to agree with Camilla, James and
to agree with Camilla, james and
Gerald, it is
to agree with Camilla, James and
Gerald, it is tremendously
important. James said sometimes
important. james said sometimes
peopla are
important. James said sometimes
people are squeamish about arts
peopla are squeamish about arts
funding,
people are squeamish about arts
funding, well, we are not in
Manchester. We see the benefit of
investing in culture and the arts
and what it does to bring people
and what it does to bring peopla
into the city,
and what it does to bring people
into the city, so we paid our arts
bill in advance we have supported
artists and we set up a streaming
platform which has been broadcasting
Greater Manchester music and talent
around the world, and the money
raised through it is supporting
venues. So you don’t need to
convince us, but I also want to say
about the sporting life of the
country, because there is a drive to
get the Premier League back but I am
worried about what is going to
happen to lower league football
clubs they have to play behind
dubs they have to play behind
closed
clubs they have to play behind
closed doors. Of course, there is a
lot more private money in football,
but I believe we need to see the
Premier League setting up a football
solidarity fund so that the whole of
solidarity fund so that the whola of
the
solidarity fund so that the whole of
the football pyramid can be
supported through this, because it
won’t just be
won’tjust be theatres that are
won’t just be theatres that are
going dark,
won’tjust be theatres that are
going dark, we will seat lower
league football clubs going out of
business one after another, and I
think culture and the arts, yes, but
we need to dump to step in because,
in the end, we have to protect as of
our economy so we can bounce back
our economy so we ran bounce back
more quickly
our economy so we can bounce back
more quickly but, when it comes to
football, I think the Premier League
has to step forward and protect
lower league clubs and it will be
crucial to keep them in business.
See if they respond. Given that the
lockdown was relatively short in
Denmark and not particularly strict,
Denmark and not particularty strict,
was failing at
Denmark and not particularly strict,
was failing at theatres an issue?
Yes, there has been a debate about
culture, until
culture, untila
Yes, there has been a debate about
culture, until a cultural life plays
a rola
a role when we are a lockdown, and I
a rola when we are a lockdown, and I
think are
a role when we are a lockdown, and I
think are appreciating culture more.
There has been a lot of culture in
the UK as well, and I think we all
appreciate that I would agree. I
think the biggest thing for theatres
and all of our institutions is to
know what’s going to happen, because
they won’t be able to ramp up. They
will probably have to run with 30%
will probably have to nm with 3096
in the
will probably have to run with 30%
in the beginning and then they can
in the beginning and then they ran
ramp up
in the beginning and then they can
ramp up slowly into 21, but they
need to know the if theatres say, in
january 21, we
January 21, we are going to have
january 21, we are going to have
this show
January 21, we are going to have
this show on, I think many people to
this show on, I think many peopla to
book
this show on, I think many people to
book tickets because we want to get
out.
ﬂ
I want to resist the time they like
because it is an investment for the
amount of money that these venues in
Manchester and Andy you are right,
Manchester is an extraordinary city
of music and comedy and theatre and
television production, the money we
need to cover the shortfall until we
ran properly
can properly reopen is almost
ran property reopen is almost
instantly
can properly reopen is almost
instantly paid back in the annual
tax revenue and the VAT. In London
alone, to a spring in £2 billion
worth of cash every year,
specifically for London theatre.
just finally,
Just finally, Fiona, I want to agree
just finally, Fiona, I want to agree
with Camilla,
Just finally, Fiona, I want to agree
with Camilla, the question is what
are we ending the lockdown for, it
is to get kids back and reopen our
businesses, but there is a huge part
of British people, we are a sociable
of British peopla, we are a sociabla
animal
of British people, we are a sociable
animal and in terms of our
psychological health and spirit and
morale, all the key workers and we
should immediately give a free
ticket to immediately is such a
vital part of our national life and
we can’t completely contribute to
that, but in order to do that, we
need to be safe in the interim. We
have had a couple of tweets in,
Graham, how can theatres continue to
Graham, how ran theatres continue to
exist in the
Graham, how can theatres continue to
exist in the climate with tears and
performances cancelled month by
performances ancellad month by
month,
performances cancelled month by
month, will we see pantomime or
theatre resume this year. Nothing
wrong with pantomime! If theatres
are laws, our cultural voices
diminished and creative voices
silenced, heartbreaking art is not
easy never more so than now. Chris,
ran you see the
can you see the government extending
ran you see the government extending
a lifeline
can you see the government extending
a lifeline to theatres? First of
all, I accept everything that James
all, I accept everything that james
and
all, I accept everything that James
and Gerald are saying about the
importance of the art sector. It is
a huge economic contributor as James
a huge economic contributor as james
"TY
a huge economic contributor as James
very powerfully set out but it is so
very powerfuuy set out but it is so
much more, it
very powerfully set out but it is so
much more, it enriches our cultural
lives, it gives entertainment and
meaning and it attracts tourists.
Given that, can you see the
Given that, ran you see the
government
Given that, can you see the
government extending a helping hand.
In terms of what we have done
already, I would strongly encourage
every arts organisation to fully use
all of the existing schemes. James
mentioned the furlough scheme
already and every organisation in
the position of theatre should be
using that scheme to have their
staff it cannot work paid an 80% of
staff it rannot work paid an 8096 of
the regular
staff it cannot work paid an 80% of
the regular salary and the
government is funding that and has
extended it recently. There are
significant loan schemes available
and the government backed loan
schemes have paid out over £20
billion and I would encourage...
There is no question that the
government has made myself out late
to help business, but a lot of
peopla are in
people are in this and cannot access
peopla are in this and cannot access
the furlough
people are in this and cannot access
the furlough scheme and people say
the loans do not apply and I am
asking, is there anything additional
that the government can do? Just
that the government ran do? just
yesterday
that the government can do? Just
yesterday the culture Secretary
announced the creation of a task
force specifically to look into the
issues that James and Gerald
issues thatJames and Gerald are
issues that james and Gerald are
rising, dearty
issues thatJames and Gerald are
rising, clearly the art sector does
rising, dearty the art sector does
have a unique
rising, clearly the art sector does
have a unique set of circumstances
and it will be the most difficult to
restart for obvious reasons and this
task force launched yesterday is
task force hunched yesterday is
designed to
task force launched yesterday is
designed to address exactly these
issues. I hope again, as we get
through the situation, as the
science improves and we get things
like antibody testing and if it is
rolled out and there is some level
of immunity, which we hope, but we
cannot be certain, but we hope there
will be,
rannot be certain, but we hope there
will be, people
cannot be certain, but we hope there
will be, people who have those
antibodies and immunity probably can
antibodies and immunity probably ran
go to the
antibodies and immunity probably can
go to the theatre and I think
science again can really help us get
science again ran really help us get
through this
science again can really help us get
through this but in the meantime
that task force is here to help with
exactly what with what James and
exactly what with what james and
Gerald
exactly what with what James and
Gerald are rising. I want to squeeze
in another question which is
pre—recorded. This question is from
pre-recorded. This question is from
Akash Lal.
Would you rather eat a sandwich made
by someone wearing a nice smile
or by someone wearing a facemask?
Back to the facemask, that dominated
the conversation and we have a
situation where the government is
advising people to wear face
coverings if they are in an enclosed
situation indoors where they cannot
easily socially distance but
otherwise, no, Camilla what is your
view? The jury is out on face masks.
The government had to say face
coverings because they did not want
members of the public by up surgical
masks that could be used by front
line NHS and carers. Would you
rather have a sandwich served to you
by someone wearing a mask with micro
I would rather have someone served
it so much he was a Bain hygiene
mles in
rules in general. I would not mind
mles in general. I would not mind
either way,
rules in general. I would not mind
either way, they could wear a face
mask or choose not to, what is
interesting is some of the evidence
that went into Sage which came from
the Royal Society and said one
psychological benefit of wearing
face masks in public, particularly
face masks in public, particularty
on transport
face masks in public, particularly
on transport and in supermarkets as
it reminded people of the need to
distance and that is important. On
the balance of probability, the
the balance of probability, thejury
the balance of probability, the jury
is out, they
the balance of probability, thejury
is out, they could help or they
might not, but if you think it helps
to stop transmission to others and
if you think it helps because it
puts you off getting to close on
puts you off getting to dose on
pub“:
puts you off getting to close on
public transport and elsewhere, it
is probably no bad thing. It is
fascinating, in Germany it is
compulsory to wear a mask on public
transport and while shopping, in
transport and whila shopping, in
Spain they
transport and while shopping, in
Spain they are compulsory in indoor
spaces and outdoor ones if you
cannot maintain distance. In
rannot maintain distance. In
Denmark,
cannot maintain distance. In
Denmark, you have not gone along
with it all. It is not part of our
culture, as it isn’t here either. In
many ways it is something that makes
peopla a little
people a little bit scared to see
peopla a little bit scared to see
this, but
this, butl
people a little bit scared to see
this, but I don’t know enough about
the science and I don’t have a
strong opinion. What I will say is
strong opinion. what I will say is
that I
strong opinion. What I will say is
that I think we have to have a deep
conversation and I hope the
government will start that soon, a
deep conversation about what is the
new normal? How are we going to live
together the next year, for example,
and I think we have to have new
international standards of
travelling, on planes, commuter
trains in the morning, we have to
have new standards and I would hope
that the UK could also be a leader
in this globally, because this is
almost like after 9/11, where
everything changed in terms of how
we were travelling across the world
and it is the same moment now and we
need new standards for everything.
It doesn’t have to be the same in
other countries, but I think we need
to understand this new normal and
that is why I am hoping, I heard you
before getting a little bit
defensive about what the government
has done and not done and I hope
that we can
that we ran get
has done and not done and I hope
that we can get into a situation
that we ran get into a situation
where
that we can get into a situation
where we all can recognise, this is
where we all ran recognise, this is
a new
where we all can recognise, this is
a new situation, mistakes have been
made and I will take responsibility
as Prime Minister that we did not
prepare properly for a pandemic like
prepare property for a pandemic like
this. We
prepare properly for a pandemic like
this. We had Sarge, swine flu and
this. We had Sarge, swine ﬂu and
all these
this. We had Sarge, swine flu and
all these things but we did not
prepare properly and I do not think
prepare property and I do not think
the
prepare properly and I do not think
the British Government did any thing
and we have to be in a mode where we
breathe breathe and now is the new
normal and we need to be part of
doing that and talking about how we
want to do that and get out of this
automatic reaction where we say we
did not do anything wrong and surely
we cannot find a fault with
anything, after all this, we also
have to evaluate and create new
standards together. James. Coming
standards together. james. Coming
back to
standards together. James. Coming
back to the question, would you
rather be served by someone... I
didn’t answer that question. You
didn’t, you’re not keen on
facemasks. Would you rather be said
by someone wearing a face mask? I
just can’t wait to be served by
someone. A sandwich or a pie would
go down great right now stop I wear
one occasionally. I think we will
get used to it. I think it would
become the new normal. I think it is
individual choice and I don’t know
how you would legislate for it.
how you would lagislate for it.
Andy?
how you would legislate for it.
Andy? Where do you stand on the
discussion about face coverings or
facemasks? I think we will have to
work quite hard to build confidence
in the public to go back into cities
and support the cultural venues and
bars and restaurants as we were
discussing a moment ago. If it can
discussing a moment ago. If it ran
help build that
discussing a moment ago. If it can
help build that confidence, then why
not. Sometimes people can see a face
not. Sometimes people ran see a face
mask and
not. Sometimes people can see a face
mask and think it is someone being
distrustful of everyone, but as
distmstful of everyone, but as
james said,
distrustful of everyone, but as
James said, it is the opposite, it
james said, it is the opposite, it
is quite a
James said, it is the opposite, it
is quite a public spirited thing to
do because it is of easily reducing
the risk of you giving the infection
to other people. I think we should
explain more about it, why it is a
good thing and why people are going
good thing and why peopla are going
to have
good thing and why people are going
to have to expect to see more of it,
I certainly feel in our city we need
to build a clear reputation for
to build a dear reputation for
being a
to build a clear reputation for
being a safety first city to get the
visitors to come back. I have been
saying to the fashion industry, we
are renowned for music and fashion
as well, let us design the must have
Manchester face mask that sells
around the world, let us make
something of this, let us make
something positive out of it. I feel
that we probably should look at what
other countries are doing and
encourage the use more, certainly on
pub“:
public transport we are saying it is
the right thing to do, so that there
is confidence amongst the travelling
pub“:
public and no disagreements between
some people wearing masks and some
some peopla wearing masks and some
not. Have you
some people wearing masks and some
not. Have you worn one yet? If they
bring any benefit at all, as I think
they do, we should embrace it. Have
you worn one? No, but I have not
been out very much. I have been
home—based. I would
home—based. Iwould be
been out very much. I have been
home—based. I would be more than
home-based. I would be more than
happy to set
home—based. I would be more than
happy to set that example. Yeah. It
is about being public spirited as
james said.
James said. Originally the
government was suggesting that face
coverings were not necessary and
might actually give a false sense of
confidence and then the government
decided that when it came to
enclosed spaces such as public
transport that face coverings were
advised. Seen how many people are
wearing face coverings on public
transport at the moment, the report
seems to be pretty mixed, are you
happy with the way it is going? In
terms of the advice, it will evolve
and change over time particularly as
and change over time particularty as
scientific
and change over time particularly as
scientific advice gets updated and I
think people should wear face
coverings on public transport, it is
a good idea. Lots of people are
a good idea. Lots of peopla are
still not
a good idea. Lots of people are
still not doing it. I would advise
them to art. There is a fair chance
it will help if they have
coronavirus, it will potentially
coronavims, it will potentially
stop it from
coronavirus, it will potentially
stop it from transmitting and it
gives people confidence to go onto
pub“:
public transport if they see people,
public transport if they see peopla,
other peopla
public transport if they see people,
other people are being careful and
other peopla are being careful and
it also
other people are being careful and
it also serves as a kind of prompt,
a reminder, that we are not in life
as we need to behave different lay,
wash our hands more, be careful,
stay alart and
stay alert and the face covering
serves as a reminder. On the
specific question about if I was
having a sandwich or being served a
sandwich, I think I would want that
person to be following the guidance
and wearing a face mask but I think
you ran still
you can still smile and the person
you ran still smile and the person
you are
you can still smile and the person
you are talking... You cannot see it
so
you are talking... You rannot see it
so easily. People
you are talking... You cannot see it
so easily. People can smile with
so easily. People ran smile with
their eyes
so easily. People can smile with
their eyes and it is my properly you
their eyes and it is my property you
ran tell
their eyes and it is my properly you
can tell even with a face mask on.
ran tell even with a face mask on.
At the
can tell even with a face mask on.
At the moment it is a recommendation
on the part of the government and in
enclosed spaces, can you see it
enclosed spaces, ran you see it
going
enclosed spaces, can you see it
going further? I think we have to be
guided by the scientific advice and
if there is compelling evidence that
it should be compulsory in the
future, I
future, lam
it should be compulsory in the
future, I am sure the government
will follow the advice but it must
as always be led by the science.
That applies here as much as it
appﬁes
applies in all the other areas we
talked about this evening. Who here
talked about this evening. who here
has worn
talked about this evening. Who here
has worn a face mask or covering so
far? I haven’t worn one yet but I
have a friend who has made one for
me and my husband. Matching masks!
For when we go back on the tube and
I think I would wear one. I hope
that mask would match the pyjamas
that you were supposed to be wearing
this evening. Camilla did a poll
onUne
online before she came in asking
what she should wear on the
overwhelming vote was for pyjamas.
Look! I don’t have respectable
Look! I don’t have respectabla
enough
Look! I don’t have respectable
enough pyjamas, but now the pole has
happened I think I will invest in
proper silk ones. Promise me that
when you come back on the programme
you will be in your pyjamas. The
nation waits with bated breath. On
that note, RR is up. Tonight our
questions came from the London area
and next week we are looking for
questions from people living in or
questions from peopla living in or
near Glasgow
questions from people living in or
near Glasgow and then
near Glasgow and then following Mike
from Southampton. From next week we
are going to do things a little bit
differently, we cannot have the
normal audience here as we have
done, but we are going to have a
virtual audience, all the way
through the programme. I am very
much looking forward to it. We are
looking for 12 people to join in the
discussion next week via video link,
you will join in
you willjoin in and be part of the
programme the whole way through. To
programme the whola way through. To
do that, you just
programme the whole way through. To
do that, you just go to the Question
Time website and apply in the usual
“Y
way and then we will get back to you
and take it from there. If you want
to
tojoin in the
and take it from there. If you want
to join in the discussion tonight
you ran tarry
you can carry that on with Adrian
you ran carry that on with Adrian
Chihs
you can carry that on with Adrian
Chiles and guests on Question Time
Extra Time which is on Radio Five
Live now as it always is. For now,
thank you to all of you, my panel
for coming in, and a thank you for
joining us from Manchester. Thank
you for those of you who joined us
live, we are grateful for your
questions and for those of you who
joined in the conversation on social
media as well. For this week, from
Question Time, goodbye.
We’ve got to be able to be more open
and more able to talk about stuff.
Let it out. There’s people out there
that can help you.
It feels really overwhelming.
Theyjust can’t cope.
It felt like I couldn’t
talk to anyone,
and part of that was because
I was ashamed of being gay.
I remember thinking,
"I’m just going to end this."
This is such a hard thing
to define or even admit.
Mental health issues
can affect any one of us.
Talk. That’s half the healing.
We need to talk.
For a range of programmes
to help start your conversation,
go to BBC iPlayer.
10 unlikely travellers...
16 countries.
Let’s go!
What have we got ourselves into?
This is no holiday —
it’s the adventure of a lifetime.
Best mode of transport ever!
I don’t know if this is terrifying
or fun.
It’s like therre putting on a show
just for us.
Probably should have gone
to the toilet before starting.
Tonight, welcome to...
0h, am I going to say this right?
Acropolis Now, because...
You never told me you were going
to start the programme with a pun.
You’ve got to continue
now you’ve started.
The reason I’ve done
it is because we’re going to cross
now to our colleague,
foreign correspondent
Quentin Sommerville,
who almost seems to be
on holiday in Greece.
How have you managed that?
It does feel like a bit
of a holiday, actually.
Normally, I’m a Middle East
correspondent, but I’ve been set
on hold for so long they said,
how about going to Athens,
and Ijumped at the chance
to get on a plane again,
and this is one of the few places
where you can get on a plane,
because the Greeks are beginning
to try and open up their
tourism industry again.
The Acropolis opened
this week to tourists.
Foreign tourists
can’t come here yet.
If you arrive, as we did today,
at Athens airport, you get a swab
stuck down your throat.
Perhaps that’s why I’m a bit hoarse.
GAGGING SOUND.
Ow!
Did it hurt?
That sound was entirely involuntary.
It wasn’t too bad.
So they take that swab,
they analyse it.
For 2A hours, we’re stuck
in a government hotel
and we can’t leave —
we’re under quarantine.
If we leave, it’s a 5,000
euros fine, which the BBC
wouldn’t be happy about,
so we’re stuck here tonight.
We get the results tomorrow.
Normally, what happens
if you’re arriving in Greece,
you then have to do a two—week
quarantine regardless
of whether you’re positive
or negative, but what the Greeks
are going to do in a few weeks’
time, from June the 15th is they’re
going to get rid of that quarantine
and allow people from many countries
to return here as holiday—makers.
Will that include British
people, as things stand?
That’s the million—dollar question.
As of right now, it will not
include British people,
but anyway they’ve got another A0
days before they actually
open the borders and get
rid of those tests.
It’s going to beJuly
the lst when all flights
across Greece will be reinstated,
so still quite a bit of time,
and what the Greek authorities have
been saying is this isn’t
about a particular country,
it’s about the science.
If a country has a very
high infection rate,
their citizens will not be able
to come here as tourists.
It will be dependent on the science.
I have a feeling, later on,
we’ll be finding out
if there is such a thing
as "the science" from a special
scientific guest, who’s a member
of a special scientific body.
Stay tuned for that and lots
more in this episode
of the Coronavirus Newscast.
The Coronavirus Newscast
from the BBC.
Hello, it’s Adam in the studio.
And it’s Laura, also
in the studio, two metres apart.
We’re going to go straight
to the Downing Street briefing.
Of course.
But hang on, it’s the version
of the Downing Street briefing
by the comedy duo Larry and Paul.
Unadvisedly dipping my toe
into the science and saying
something I don’t understand
about R, perhaps, and
immediately regretting it...
Explaining what the R value is,
wishing they taught statistics
properly at school, trying
to explain it again,
realising the futility
and just giving up...
Pretending that’s what Ijust said.
Obviously, it’s a pastiche.
Obviously.
But quite accurate in some aspects.
I have no view on the conduct of any
members of the press,
any other members of the press.
I would never express a view other
than to say solidarity
with all myjournalistic colleagues
who are working very hard
in challenging circumstances.
Fergus Walsh has been keeping an eye
on various medical issues.
Lots of that today.
Fergus, where are you and what
have you been doing?
I’m at the top of a very big hill
that I sometimes cycle up.
Fortunately, I’m not wearing
what I would normally
wear when I’m cycling.
Are you looking for the vaccine?
I’m moving the vaccine.
A lot of news that.
AstraZeneca, huge multinational drug
company, said today that it reckons
it can do a billion doses —
that’s 1,000 million doses —
of the Oxford vaccine,
big caveat, if it works,
by the end of next year,
and today was four weeks
since the first volunteers
were immunised, so the team will be
looking for antibodies,
but I have to say there’s one big
problem surrounding all of this,
which is that those volunteers need
to go out and meet the virus
in their daily lives,